# 4.3 Complex Roots

The final key property of polynomials determined by their degree are their number of roots. You may have learned before that a real-valued polynomial with real coefficients of degree  has anywhere between 0 and  roots, depending on its specifics. However, we can actually make a stronger claim, which we will examine in this article.

**All real-valued polynomials with real coefficients of degree  have exactly  complex roots.**

One important fact to remember is that the real numbers are a subset of the complex numbers, meaning that all real numbers are also complex. However, not all complex numbers are real.

The first class of polynomial we encounter with varying numbers of roots is the parabola, of degree 2. You may have studied before that parabolas have one of the following:

* 2 roots, meaning they intercept the  axis twice
* 1 root, meaning they sit on the  axis \(this is known as a double root, and is actually treated as two roots of the same value\)
* 0 roots, meaning that they sit completely above or completely below the  axis

Recall, given a quadratic of the form , the solutions to  are given by . The three cases above come from the three different states of the discriminant, . When , there are two distinct roots. When , the "plus-or-minus" term vanishes, leaving a double root at . The case we're now interested in is when , where we would previously claim there to be "no solution" since we cannot take the square root of a negative number. In fact, there are still two perfectly valid solutions - they're just not real numbers.

## Complex Numbers

Complex numbers, as discussed earlier in the course, are a superset of the real numbers. We can represent a complex number  in **rectangular form** as , where  are real numbers and  is the imaginary unit defined by . We say  is the "real part" and  is the "imaginary part." We can represent the set of real numbers as complex numbers, with .

The simplest parabola that has complex roots is , which sits one unit above the  axis, centered on the  axis. It has roots  and , respectively, which you can verify with the quadratic equation.

An important consequence of our new, stronger definition of the number of roots of a polynomial is that **all polynomials are now completely factorable into linear terms**, whereas previously this was not the case. Previously, we could factor  and  into  and , respectively, because we knew these polynomials in standard form had roots. However, now we can factor  as well, into , by the factor theorem. In general,



for some real constant . Remember, our polynomials still only take and return real numbers as inputs and outputs, and all coefficients are still real numbers. It's just the roots that are potentially complex.

### Complex Root Pairs

As it turns out, complex roots always occur in pairs. No real polynomial can have only a single complex root, or three complex roots, or any odd number of complex roots. Furthermore:



This says that if a complex number is a root of a real polynomial, its **complex conjugate** must also be a root. Conjugates are defined exactly as above - the conjugate of  is . Complex conjugates are defined this way for the following reason:



When multiplying a complex number by its conjugate, the imaginary parts fall out and we're left with a real number. In particular, this real number  is the **square of the magnitude** of the complex number, i.e. the squared distance from 0.

Let's justify why  and  will always exist together as roots. By the factor theorem, if they are both roots of some  of degree :



The product  yields a completely real polynomial. This real polynomial, multiplied by the rest of , which is assumed to be real, will result in a real . However, if  were multipled by , for some general complex number , the resulting last term of  would contain complex terms, meaning that  would have complex coefficients, going against our definition set in the beginning.

