<title>2.0: Introduction – Proof Techniques</title>

# Chapter 2: Proof Techniques
---

<br>

The word "proof" is thrown out in all fields, from science to mathematics, all the way to philosophy. In every field, a proof boils down to some information which asserts the validity of a statement. What that statement might be could be anything from any field, but what actually constitutes a proof for that statement differs from subject to subject.

As seen in earlier chapters, mathematics consists primarily of starting from little to nothing, and building up complex and useful theorems and lemmas. In each building step, we had to use what we were given in order to verify our new statement. We were implicitly proving (using the techniques to follow) all throughout this course, showing it as a natural mathematical property. 

Now, let us formally define what a mathematical proof is. 

> ### Definition 2.0.1: **Proof**
> A mathematical proof is a **finite** sequence of steps which, when combined in a specific order, indicate the truth of a specific statement. Each step in the sequence is known as a logical deduction. Logical deductions, themselves, must be true and can either be something given, or something deduced using what is given and a previous logical deduction.

<br>

The power of a mathematical proof comes in the subtly of a finite proof proving a statement in infinitely many cases. Using proof techniques, a very short sequence of steps can prove a statement for a set as large as the real numbers.