<title>6.5: The Binomial Theorem – Polynomials</title>


# 6.5: The Binomial Theorem
---

<br>

Jump to:
- [Motivation](#motivation)
- [The Combinatorial Approach](#combinatorial)
- [The Binomial Theorem, Formalized](#formal)
- [The General Term](#general)
- [Sum of Coefficients](#sumcoef)
- [Determining Coefficients without Expansion](#withoutexp)

<br>

In this note, we will extend our discussion of the combinatorial term and Pascal's triangle into a useful concept in algebra, known as the binomial theorem. Recall, a binomial is a polynomial with two terms, where terms are items joined by addition. A trinomial is a polynomial with three terms.

<br>

<a name='motivation'>

## Motivation
---

</a>

<br>

Consider the following expansion of the product of two binomials:

<div align=center>

$$
(a + b) (c + d)  = a(c + d) + b(c + d) = ac + ad + bc + bd
$$

</div>

<br>

To compute the final expansion, we multiplied every combination of terms in the first polynomial by terms in the second polynomial. In this example, we multiplied two different binomials --- polynomials with two terms --- both of which were used two different variables. Let's concentrate our efforts on a simpler case, that is, binomials multiplied by themselves.

What if we wanted to expand $$(x + y)^2$$? We can follow the same technique as above --- multiply $$x$$ by $$x + y$$, yielding $$x^2 + xy$$, and $$y$$ by $$x + y$$, yielding $$xy + y^2$$ and sum the result, yielding $$x^2 + 2xy + y^2$$.


What if instead we wanted to expand $$(x + y)^3$$? One approach is to write $$(x+y)^3$$ as $$(x+y)(x+y)(x+y)$$, and manually try and multiply every combination of one item from the first bracket, one item in the
second bracket, and one item in the third bracket. If we were to do this, we would expand in the following way:

$$(x+y)(x+y)(x+y) = xxx + xxy + xyx + xyy + yxx + yxy + yyx + yyy$$

However, if we were to try to expand $$(x+y)^4$$ in this way, we'd have a mess on our hands. Another approach is to recognize that $$(x + y)^3$$ is the product of $$(x+y)^2$$, which we know to be $$x^2 + 2xy + y^2$$, with $$x + y$$. We can then multiply each term in $$x^2 + 2xy + y^2$$ by each term in $$x + y$$, to yield the final expansion of $$x^3 + 3x^2y + 3xy^2 + y^3$$. Sure, this works, however with exponents greater than $$3$$ one can see that this process becomes messy.

<br>

<a name="combinatorial">

## The Combinatorial Approach
---

</a>

<br>

Let's approach this problem differently. Consider the expansion of $$(x + y)^3$$, which we can write as $$(x+y)(x+y)(x+y)$$. We know that each term in its expansion must contain one term from each polynomial being multiplied. Since the only possible terms are $$x$$ and $$y$$, and there are three polynomials being multiplied, the each term in the expansion of $$(x+y)^3$$ will contain either 3 $$x$$s, $$2$$ $$x$$s and 1 $$y$$, 1 $$x$$ and 2 $$y$$s, or 3 $$y$$s. Now, we need to determine the number of $$x^3$$, $$x^2y$$, $$xy^2$$ and $$y^3$$ terms that exist.

To determine the coefficient on $$x^3$$, we think, how many ways can we choose 3 $$x$$s, from a possible 3? This is precisely $${3 \choose 3}$$. Similarly, to determine the coefficient on $$xy^2$$, we ask, how many ways can we choose 1 $$x$$ from a possible of 3? Again, this is $${3 \choose 1}$$. We don't need to consider the number of ways to choose the $$y$$s in these cases, as whatever isn't chosen to be an $$x$$ is automatically a $$y$$. Putting all of this together, we have:

<div align=center>

$$(x + y)^3 = {3 \choose 3}x^3 + {3 \choose 2} x^2y + {3 \choose 1} xy^2 + {3 \choose 0} y^3 = x^3 + 3x^2y + 3xy^2 + y^3$$

</div>

This confirms our result from the previous section. One point of interest is the fact that since $${3 \choose i} = {3 \choose 3 - I}$$, we can treat our coefficients as either the number of ways to choose $$x$$s OR the number of ways to choose $$y$$s. This means that we can also write the above result as:

<div align=center>

$$(x + y)^3 = {3 \choose 0}x^3 + {3 \choose 1} x^2y + {3 \choose 2} xy^2 + {3 \choose 3} y^3 = x^3 + 3x^2y + 3xy^2 + y^3$$

</div>

<br>

In general, we can write $$(x + y)^n$$ as:

<div align=center>

$$(x+y)^n = (x+y)(x+y)(x+y)...(x+y)$$

</div>

To simplify the expansion, we need to determine the number of ways to choose $$n$$ $$x$$s, $$n-1$$ $$x$$s and 1 y, $$n-2$$ $$x$$s and 2 $$y$$s, so on and so forth, until we find the number of ways to choose $$n$$ $$y$$s. The result is presented in the following section.

<br>

<a name='formal'>

## The Binomial Theorem, Formalized
---

</a>

<br>

The binomial theorem states the following: 


> ### Definition: **The Binomial Theorem**
> The binomial theorem states the following:
> $$
(x + y)^n = {n \choose 0}x^n + {n \choose 1}x^{n-1}y + {n \choose 2}x^{n-2}y^2 + ... + {n \choose n-1}xy^{n-1} + {n \choose n}y^n = \sum_{k = 0}^n {n \choose k} x^{n-k}y^k
$$

<br>

It is worth noting that since we're using the combinatorial term to determine coefficients, the coefficients in the expansion of $$(x + y)^n$$ are the entries in the $$n$$-th row of Pascal's triangle. However, rarely will we expand $$(x + y)^n$$ itself; we will typically expand more complicated binomials raised to other exponents.

Also, the term that we've introduced as the combinatorial term – $${n \choose k}$$ – is sometimes referred to as the "binomial coefficient", because of its significance in the binomial theorem. 

<br>

### Example

Let's determine the expansion of $$(3a^2 - 2b)^5$$. In this case, we have $$x = 3a^2$$, $$y = -2b$$ and $$n = 5$$.

<div align=center>

$$
\begin{aligned}
(3a^2 - 2b)^5 &= {5 \choose 0} (3a^2)^5 + {5 \choose 1} (3a^2)^4 (-2b) + {5 \choose 2} (3a^2)^3 (-2b)^2 + {5 \choose 3} (3a^2)^2 (-2b)^3 + {5 \choose 4} (3a^2) (-2b)^4 + {5 \choose 5}(-2b)^5 \\\ &= 243a^{10} - 810a^8b + 1080a^6b^2 - 720a^4b^3 + 240 a^2b^4 - 32b^5 \end{aligned}
$$

</div>

<br>

<a name='general'>

## The General Term
---

</a>

<br>

> ### Definition: **General term**
> We define the $$k$$-th term in the expansion of a binomial as $$t_k = {n \choose k} x^{n-k}y^k$$, with $$k$$ ranging from 0 to $$n$$.

<br>

In the expansion of $$(3a^2 - 2b)^5$ from the previous section, the general term is:

<div align=center>

$$
\begin{aligned}
t_k &= {5 \choose k} (3a^2)^{5 - k} (-2b)^k \\\ &= {5 \choose k} 3^{5-k} a^{10 - 2k} (-1)^k 2^k b^k \\\ &= (-1)^k {5 \choose k} 2^k 3^{5-k} a^{10 - 2k}b^k \end{aligned}
$$

</div>

You may be asking yourself why we've written the general term this way. With the $$(-1)^k$$ at the front, we can quickly tell whether a term is positive or negative. By splitting the $$2$$, $$3$$, $$a$$ and $$b$$, each exponential base is isolated, simplifying the multiplication process (i.e. we don't need to multiply $$3$$ and $$a^2$$ and then raise that to an exponent; instead, we raise $$3$$ and $$a^2$$ to exponents separately, as we are more likely to know the powers of $$3$$ on their own).


Let's look at another example, namely, the expansion of $$(x^5 - \frac{1}{x^2})^7$$.

<div align=center>

$$
\begin{aligned} t_k &= {7 \choose k} (x^5)^{7-k}(-x^{-2})^{k} \\\ &= (-1)^k {7 \choose k} x^{35 - 5k} x^{-2k} \\\ &= (-1)^k {7 \choose k} x^{35 - 7k} \end{aligned}
$$

</div>

Since $$x^5 - x^{-2}$$ is a function of only one variable, $$x$$, we were able to combine $$(x^5)^{7-k}$$ and $$(x^{-2})^{k}$$ into a single $$x$$ term. Therefore, the general term only contains one variable, instead of two as in the previous example. We will use this fact in the next section to aid us in determining coefficients for arbitrary terms.

<br>

<a name='sumcoef'>

## Sum of Coefficients
---

</a>

<br>

In the expansion of an instance of the binomial theorem, if one sets all variables equal to 1, then the result is the sum of the coefficients of in the expansion. Let's consider $$f(x) = (2x - 3x^2)^4$$. If we set $$x = 1$$, then $$f(1) = (-1)^4 = 1$$, telling us that the sum of coefficients in the expansion of $$f(x)$$ should be $$1$$. We can verify this via expansion:

<div align=center>

$$
\begin{aligned}
f(x) &= (2x - 3x^2)^4 \\\ &= {4 \choose 0}(2x)^4 + {4 \choose 1}(2x)^3(-3x^2) + {4 \choose 2}(2x)^2(-3x^2)^2 + {4 \choose 3}(2x)(-3x^2)^3 + {4 \choose 4}(-3x^2)^4 \\\ &= 16x^4 - 96x^5 + 216x^6 - 216x^7 + 81x^8 \\\ \\\ \implies f(1) &= 16 - 96 + 216 - 216 + 81 = -80 + 81 = 1 \end{aligned}$$

</div>

This also works with multivariate binomials, i.e. binomials that are functions of more than one variable (as all previous examples were). In addition to verifying this on your own, you should also think about why this technique works overall. Feel free to ask questions.

An interesting result in the above example is that no matter how large $$n$$ is, the sum of the coefficients in $$(2x - 3x^2)^n$$ is always either $$1$$ or $$-1$$, depending on whether $$n$$ is even or odd. This is interesting, as when $$n = 1000$$, terms of the form $${1000 \choose k}$$ can be on the order of $$10^{30}$$, yet the sum of coefficients is still just $$1$$ - fascinating!

<br>

<a name='withoutexp'>

## Determining Coefficients without Expansion
---

</a>

<br>

Consider the expansion of $$(2x^3 + x^{-1})^8$$. You should verify that it has the general term $$t_k = {8 \choose k} 2^{8-k}x^{24 - 4k}$$. In the exponent for $$x$$, since there is a $$-4k$$ term, we know that consecutive terms decrease in their exponent by $$4$$ - the first term has exponent $$24$$, the second exponent $$20$$, and so on. (You may be able to see this without calculating the general term, as the "difference in power" between $$2x^3$$ and $$x^{-1}$$ is $$-4$$.)

Suppose we want to find the coefficient on $$x^{16}$$ in the expansion. In the general term, we can set the exponent, $$24-4k$$, equal to $$16$$, and solve for the term number ($$k$$), which in this case is $$2$$. We then can plug $$2$$ into the general term to find $$t_2 = {8 \choose 2}2^{8-2}x^{16}$$, yielding that the coefficient is $${8 \choose 2}2^{8-2} = 56 \cdot 32 = 1792$$.

What if we were asked for the coefficient on $$x^{10}$$? Upon solving $$24 - 4k = 10$$, we yield the solution $$k = \frac{7}{2}$$. However, this doesn't make any sense - $$k$$ represents the term number in the expansion, and must be an integer between $$0$$ and $$8$$ inclusive. Therefore, in this case, there is no $$x^{10}$$ term in the expansion, and we can report that there is no solution.

<br>

In the next article, we will look at some extensions of the binomial theorem, many of them revolving around the general term.  




